---
layout: post
title: The Other Obesity Epidemic
subtitle: How Information Bloat is Endangering our Mental Fitness, and What We Can Do About It
permalink: mental-obesity
---

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*qYgTRiEwBaBht8b70iI58A.jpeg)


It is old news that in recent years a staggering amount of people have become
obese. From 1990 to 2010, the amount of adults who are obese in the United
States alone increased a staggering 57%. Other developed countries have seen a
similar increase, as well.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*aFBxX1xdXcEH16pmHOhy0w.jpeg)
{: style="text-align: center; font-size: small"}
Fig 1. Obesity rate increases over 20 years.

Among the factors cited as a major contributor to this drastic increase in
obesity is the sheer *volume* of food that is now readily available. That is
exacerbated by the decreasing nutritional *quality* of that food.

While food manufacturers feverishly increased the quantity of food they produced
and marketed, [the nutritional quality
decreased](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17766531/). The more beneficial
macro-nutrients a piece of food has (healthy fats and quality proteins), the
more costly it is to make — and thus to buy and consume. The result is that the
easiest food to make, to buy, and to eat are the worst foods for us. As a result
our diets became more unhealthy over the past few decades, as we began to
consume more food and food of poorer quality.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*B7T7O_AoJNv4ShNKgfc8Yg.png)
{: style="text-align: center; font-size: small"}
Fig. 2 — The makeup of the American diet

Interestingly, a similar trend to the one in food consumption has occurred in
the production and consumption of *information*. The internet has created an
environment where not only is it *easier* to publish and push out information
than ever before, but an entire industry depends on [more content being
published and shared every minute of every
day](https://www.brandwatch.com/2016/03/96-amazing-social-media-statistics-and-facts-for-2016/).
And in the true style of hyper-growth capitalism, that content is exponentially
growing.

{: style="text-align: center; font-size: small"}
Fig 3 — The Exponential growth of content

As with food, the easier it has become to publish information, the more the
quantity has increased and the [quality has
decreased](http://www.brafton.com/news/content-writing-news/70-brands-produce-poor-quality-content-ineffective/).
So what do you suppose has happened to our information diet? I fear that it may
be mirroring our food diet.

### Information Overabundance, Cognitive Obesity

Many people have this odd opinion that there is no such thing as too much
information. A veritable avalanche of businesses are built on this premise —
pedaling services to help keep you up to date on all the things to know, and
throwing even more “things of interest” at you by the second. But why do we have
this attitude toward information— that one can never have too much?

But consider how much time we spend consuming information these days. Also,
consider how much *more* time we spend consuming it than we used to. The chart
below illustrates how much more time respondents in a survey spent consuming
media this year than the previous year.

![])https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*KtLBHVh6hUYyqUSrJlDt1A.png)
{: style="text-align: center; font-size: small"}
Fig 4 — The time spend consuming information. credit: Nielsen

That’s right, in one year, we have increased the amount of time we spend
consuming information by 10%. But how much of that additional information was
quality content? See below:

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*axGCrsH__9Il-YG4.gif)
{: style="text-align: center; font-size: small"}
Fig 5 — Trust in content. Source: [http://contentsmagazine.com/articles/reconsider-the-source/](http://contentsmagazine.com/articles/reconsider-the-source/)

If 63% of respondents trust web content less than they did 2 years ago, imagine
what that trust index could look like given the exponential increase in content
(see Fig. 3) that we continue to see? It’s a grim picture, indeed.

### Cognitive Load

I use the term “mental obesity”, but a better term would be *excess cognitive
load*. A piece from the Nielsen Norman Group [says it
best](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/minimize-cognitive-load/):

> Just like computers, **human brains have a limited amount of processing power**
> …When the amount of information coming in exceeds our ability to handle it, our
performance suffers. We may take longer to understand information, miss
important details, or even get overwhelmed and abandon the task.

Just how bad can a heavy cognitive load be?

* Several studies have associated a heavy cognitive load with an increase in
errors.[[1]](http://psycnet.apa.org/?&fa=main.doiLanding&doi=10.1037/0022-0663.84.4.429)[[2]](http://psycnet.apa.org/?&fa=main.doiLanding&doi=10.1037/0022-0663.91.2.358)[[3]](http://psycnet.apa.org/?&fa=main.doiLanding&doi=10.1037/0022-0663.87.2.319)[[4]](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.2044-8279.1992.tb01017.x/abstract;jsessionid=3B6D306ECDFF0CFC133E858F244B10B4.f04t02)[[5]](http://psycnet.apa.org/?&fa=main.doiLanding&doi=10.1037/0022-0663.79.4.347)[[6]](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1207/s1532690xci0201_3)[[7]](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1207/S15326985EP3801_4)
* A heavy cognitive load has also been shown to increase stereotyping, and
generalization errors.
[[8]](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1559-1816.2003.tb01875.x/abstract)

In a word, a heavy cognitive load can make us mentally unfit — fatty and easily
out of breath when it comes to intellectual tasks.

So, what are we as information consumers to do? The onus seems to be on us to
become more intellectually fit than our predecessors, but with the glut of
mass-produced informational junk-food, just how do we do that?

Perhaps we can take this food analogy to its logical conclusion. Take the advice
of nutritional science, and apply it to information consumption: take smaller
bites, chew for longer, and savor and digest.

### Take Smaller Bites

An effective way to sift through all of the writing online is to take small
bites of anything you *think* you might want to read. This is the equivalent of
taking a small bite of something — in order to try it. Scan the entire piece for
headings. Try to figure out what the piece is trying to say, and look for
sentences that convey interesting or useful information.

Also look for spelling and grammar errors. Often times, if I see more than a
few, I stop reading. Chances are, someone else is making the same points, but
actually knows how to write well. If I’m interested in the topic, I’ll spend a
few minutes finding a more well-written piece on that topic. Is that elitist? I
don’t think so. I just don’t want to give my attention to someone who didn’t
bother to try to effectively communicate to me. The only exception to this is
personal stories and eyewitness accounts.

Attach your attention to the information. This can be anything from saving an
article to your “read/review” stack, or just getting it in a psychic space that
marks it as something you’re going to *really* look at. Don’t gum up the works
with a heap of stuff you wouldn’t look at twice on a stack of paper
publications.

I keep a “read/review” list in my huge [Workflowy](http://workflowy.com/)
document, with links to stuff I plan to actually look over. I try to save only
things that I know I will spend more than 5 minutes reading and thinking about.
There’s a famous rule that governs behavior like that — stick to it.

### Chew For Longer

You’ve probably heard — from time to time, and from various outlets — that
chewing your food for longer is better for you (on *numerous* levels)? Well the
same holds true for processing the information. Take and process the information
that you have “bitten” off. This process should take you longer than you think
it should — just like chewing food. Really swirl it around your mind for a
while. Just as you’d let a really good piece of food move around your mouth to
hit all the sensory parts of your tongue, so should you let all of the parts of
your mind touch the information you’re now processing.

What does this translate to when it comes to information? There are a bunch of
things. You can take notes. Systems like
[Zettelkasten](http://www.dansheffler.com/blog/2015-05-05-the-zettelkasten-method/)
or [Cornell Notes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cornell_Notes) can be helpful
for taking notes and organizing them. Other useful systems (and related
applications) abound. A really neat blog that goes deep into keeping and taking
notes can be found [here](http://takingnotenow.blogspot.com/).

Either way, “chewing” over information longer will do two things:

1.  Help you to better process information, so that it becomes embedded in your body
of knowledge, accessible, and thus useful (and isn’t that the goal?).
1.  Prevent you from consuming fluff or things that won’t end up enriching your
knowledge base.

### Savor and Digest

This is the part that should take the least amount of time, but *only* if you
have a mature and effective organizational system. Think about it this way. When
you’re swallowing food, you’re starting the process of having your body *use*
the food you’ve just processed — you’re now making that food useful. When
processing information — learning — it should be no different. You’re now
passing along that information to that part of your mind that will store it as
*knowledge* for you to use. Swallowing the information you’re learning involves
two main things:

**Verifying** that you really do know it The best way to do this is by testing
yourself, which I’ve found is most effectively done by having to teach or
present it to someone else that doesn’t know about the subject at all. I taught
philosophy at a community college for over 4 years, and I learned more about
philosophy in that time than I learned in my entire time in graduate school.

It is well known that having to teach others something forces you to get a
better grip on things. You may think you know something inside out, but when you
have to explain it to others, you realized that you don’t. This is especially
true when you have to teach things to people who don’t know much (or anything)
about your subject. A favorite quote of mine, attributed to Albert Einstein,
captures this truth perfectly:

> “If you can’t explain it simply, you don’t understand it well enough.”

**Organizing** the information This part involves making the information readily
accessible, and ready for updates, emendations, further analysis, and other
reviews. It is also a way to ensure that this chunk of new knowledge finds its
way into the web of your current knowledge as a *connected piece*. If you can’t
connect what you’re now learning to what you already know, the chances of you
really grabbing a hold of it go down dramatically.

The amount of “content” on the web will likely continue to increase
exponentially for the next decade (or more). As this happens, it’s important to
ensure that we adopt practices to guard against cognitive overload, and the
stress that comes with it.
