---
layout: post
title: Forget Work, Play Hard
subtitle: Gone are the days of “work hard, play hard”. Enter a new method for coming up with great ideas.
tags: [free play, brainstorming, ideas]
published: true
permalink: play-hard
comments: true
---


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*DskYcPjSE4I8NQWnxEGXag.jpeg)


I don’t think there’s a formula for regularly generating great ideas. In fact, I
don’t think that we really *generate* ideas at all---at least not worthwhile
ones. Rather, we encounter thoughts and ideas, then try them on, and develop
them over time.

That being said, I *do* think that there is a process to follow that puts you in
the best possible headspace to encounter new and interesting ideas. Actually,
calling it a process is kind of a misnomer. It’s more like the *shrugging off*
of processes---an abandonment of the pressure to innovate. When done correctly,
I’ve seen it generate some really cool and interesting ideas. Now, not all of
them were able to be realized as profitable at the time, but some were. More on
that another time. For now, I want to outline the method as succinctly as I can.

## Going Deep Is Fine

I’m currently reading Cal Newport’s book [Deep
Work](http://calnewport.com/books/deep-work/). There is a lot of great material
in it. Among the heap of tips for doing great work is something called a
“[Roosevelt
Dash](http://www.businessinsider.com/theodore-roosevelt-productivity-trick-2016-1)”.
The nut of the concept is this: when you want to do a task or project, you can
force deep focus on it by taking the time you’d estimate it would take and
reducing it substantially. Then just get to work, and don’t move away from that
work until you’ve finished.

Using the dash effectively requires you to do a few things: take your deadline
seriously, and remove yourself from the natural flow of distractions, hunger,
thirst, stretching, etc. Basically, when you go, you go *hard*. This, Newport
says, will force you to also go into a deep focus on your work.

I love this idea, but it doesn’t exactly work when you *don’t* have your work
defined for you---when you need to come up with ideas. Here’s something that I
realized in that regard: going deep is not the answer to coming up with cool new
ideas. In fact, going into deep focus is *antithetical* to coming up with new
ideas.

In short, it does no good to go *deep* if you haven’t gone *wide.*

## Going Wide Is Better

Focus is great for most of the work that we do. That’s because most of our work
is by and large already defined---we know what we have to do. There is a
spectrum of how well-defined work is. Some is pre-packaged---read to just do.
Other work requires a lot of thought and preparation before even beginning it.
But usually---no matter the type of work you have in front of you, it has pretty
clear constraints.

For example: You may not know exactly what the end-game is for the presentation
on Q2’s profits, but the constraints are clear that it has to say *something*
about Q2’s profits. Deep focus can help you here because you have an idea of
where you’re going. Most destinations on the map are not live options . You’ve
got a general location of your destination, you just need to find the route by
which to travel there.

When we are just trying to drum up ideas, the map is totally open. Any place on
it is a potential destination for us. The more we can align our thinking to
reflect that, the better we’ll be at generating ideas. As I have heard [David
Allen say many
times](http://www.fastcompany.com/1792100/how-bad-plans-and-good-ideas-ruin-meetings),
trying to brainstorm with the focus of having a “good idea” is actually
counterproductive. Simply put, aiming for a “good idea” is actually a terrible
idea.

### Go Wide With FREE PLAY

So here’s a better approach: **free play**. The concept is simple: wander around
in as wide a mental space as possible, as freely as possible for some designated
amount of time. Encounter as many thoughts as you can, noting as many as you
can. As you end your time wandering, select the ideas you’d like to try on.

I intend to write just a little about this process now, with more to come later.
Mostly, I’m doing this because I’m teasing out the idea of free play in
practice, but also because it’s got a lot more to it. Here are some components
worth noting.

**Freedom is hard.** To really reap the benefits of free play, you need to get
your mind to be as free as possible. This is the most difficult part of the
process---by far. Our minds are very good at retaining and juggling ideas,
goals, desires, needs, etc. Ask anyone who’s ever attempted meditation, and they
will tell you. Getting those things off of your mind is exceedingly difficult.

**Thoughts, not ideas.** The term “idea” carries a lot of weight. Usually, part
of that weight is the weight of ownership. After all, the phrase “*whose idea?*”
comes right to the fore when we talk about ideas. Thoughts, on the other hand,
don’t seem to have this weight. We have thoughts all the time, but we don’t seem
to equate them with a commitment or ownership. So when you’re looking to
leverage free play, be sure to wander around encountering *thoughts*, rather
than *ideas*.

**Encountering vs. Having.** In line with the use of the term “idea”, try to
think not about *having* thoughts when your’e doing free play. Think instead
about *encountering* thoughts. They’re not yours---you didn’t create them, and
you’re not responsible for them. You can take or leave them, so act accordingly.

**You’re trying on ideas.** Most of us wouldn’t feel great buying clothes
without trying them on. This is the way we need to look at ideas as well. After
a session of free play, when you’ve got some thoughts recorded, keep a list of
thoughts and ideas you’d like to try on. That’s the takeaway of doing free play.
You’re looking for ideas to try on. That trying on period can be hours, days,
months, or years. It all depends on what the idea is.

The great thing is that (to further stretch the clothing metaphor) you can take
the ideas into a tailor to have them altered to suit you and your goals. Every
person you bounce the idea off of (including yourself) can make alterations to
it over time. But at the end, if you’re not happy with it anymore, you can leave
it behind---no questions asked.
