---
layout: post
title: Do We Need the News Every Day?
subtitle:
tags: [news, wisdom, knowledge, learning]
published: true
permalink: do-we-need-the-news
comments: true
---
![a sea of news]({{ site.baseurl }}graphics/news.jpg)

we're afloat in a sea of news
{: style="text-align: center; font-size: small"}


## I don’t read the news daily anymore. There I said it.

Okay, I don’t really mean that I don’t read the news *at all*, and I don’t mean
to suggest that whoever reads this piece shouldn’t either. That kind of brings
me to my point, as it happens.

You see I *do* read the news, a little. I’ve limited myself to literally
[Quartz](http://qz.com/)’s weekday email bulletin, and whatever few minutes of
NPR I hear during my morning routine (not technically *reading*, though).

<!--more-->

I used to make following the news a priority. I used to value knowing the ins
and outs of current events---the political issues of the day, the big goings on.
To me, being up to date and in the know about the broader world around me was
tantamount to being a compassionate and caring cosmopolitan, as my liberal
education had suggested I become.

Then I became a husband, a father, and I [closed the window I had left open to a
life in
academia](http://www.mikesturm.net/home/why-i-chose-to-give-up-on-academia). To
state it more bluntly, my focus shifted.

Don’t get me wrong; I still care about what’s going on in the world. I still
have strong political opinions. I still think that what is happening in the
corners of the globe is significant.

However, I no longer think that *my* knowing about each little wrinkle in the
stories, as they unfold, is important. For 99.9% of us, knowing those things
probably isn’t important. In reality, those wrinkles, presented in so many
articles, blog posts, and tweets, are of relatively little importance---even to
the broader story of which they are a part.

There’s just way *way* too much noise bombarding us today for me to even muster
up the energy to keep up. There are thousands of outlets publishing news
stories, analysis, and opinion pieces pushing each other against the gates of
our collective attention each day. They report contradicting facts, contain
outdated information at publication time, or just don’t really report anything
at all.

But for those who hoped---as I at one time did---to be “in the know” about
current events, all that work trying to “keep up” is enough to buttress an acute
case of [FOMO](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fear_of_missing_out). It can get to
a point where one’s morning coffee is barely half guzzled before the wave of
panic washes over: “what am I missing out on?”

## You’re Not REALLY Missing Anything

Here’s some relief: I don’t think you are missing out. Okay, that’s a little
oversimplified of an assessment. You *are *missing out on the intelligentsia’s
version of gossip (on a global, geopolitical scale), but you’re *not *missing
out on two key things that you should care about: understanding and wisdom.

To be connected with and aware of the transitory goings-on of current events is
to have knowledge of small, discrete facts. That is what I would estimate 97% of
news outlets concentrate on. But any connection to those things quickly fades.
It is not understanding or wisdom; it just isn’t that valuable.

After all, knowing that [there were 681 heroin-related deaths in Illinois in
2014](http://thetelegraph.com/news/76603/news-briefs-from-around-the-region-jan-15-2016)
is somewhat useful, but quickly becomes dated and less relevant, as days pass.
Knowing that [the State of Illinois made severe cuts to mental health programs
in the years preceding this mortality
spike](http://www.namigc.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/NAMI-White-Paper-NAMI-Chicago-May-2015.pdf)
is a bit more valuable. But in order to find out the latter, you’d have to wait
for stats to be gathered, and reports to be written.** For clearer
understanding, patience is required***.*

Understanding is valuable, and thus, it takes much longer to gain than mere
knowledge of factoids. So rather than consuming news and spreading links and
commentary on Twitter and Facebook like a madman (or madwoman), allow some time
to pass. Seek out researched and vetted narratives about the issues written well
after their inciting incidents have come to a close.
([Longform](http://longform.org/) is great for this, by the way. They also have
[an app](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/longform/id490437064?mt=8).)

This is not news (pardon the pun). Government agencies, academics, and think
tanks have all followed the same model. The 9/11 Commission Report wasn’t
released until [July of 2004](http://www.9-11commission.gov/report/). The
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission didn’t release it’s report until [January of
2011](http://fcic.law.stanford.edu/). That’s a 3 year lag on both occasions.

But that’s the point. To get what’s valuable from information, one has to
distill it. As anyone in the business of distillation can tell you, it’s a
time-consuming and intricate process. The more you rush it, the poorer the
quality of what you end up with.

So far as the the flow of information goes, there are 3 currents that any
storyteller can grab onto when conveying information:

- **The Lower Current**: fluctuating, changing, different from one day to another,
turbulent and hard to keep track of.
- **The Higher Current**: the long-term trends, little change, and what change
there is is marked by its slight nature.
- **Highest Current:** unchanging, universal truths. Truths about human nature,
truths about the universe, etc.

## Get To the Top Currents

All of the day’s discrete stories and factoids of longer-running sagas play out
in the low current of information. There is turbulence. Things change from day
to day, and uncertainty abounds.

Here, you can speculate, guess, and give conditional predictions, but at best,
you’re presenting small and disconnected pieces of reality. Whatever story there
is, it’s disjointed and clunky because it’s current and unfolding. No good,
coherent, insightful story is ever the result of merely conveying what is
happening in front of you in real-time.

> *A valuable and coherent story is the result of distance between the storyteller
and the temporal location of the story---the time and place it happened.*

That distance allows for reflection---for the storyteller to grab various
theoretical lenses through which to view what happened, to try to make some
sense of it, and put it in context.

That distance is only obtained by floating up to the highest current---where the
moral of the story lives. It is not an easy journey to float up there, but it is
well worth it.
