---
layout: post
title: Entrepreneurship Is Not the Answer
subtitle:
tags: [entrepreneurship, business, creativity, learning, play]
published: true
permalink: entrepreneurship-no-answer
comments: true
---
![]({{ site.baseurl }}graphics/kid-computer.jpeg)

You wouldn't *believe* his burn rate...
{: style="text-align: center; font-size: small"}


When I came home from college at age 19 and told my parents that I was going to
change my major to philosophy, their first reaction was indignant curiosity.
*What the hell are you going to do with that?* They asked me. As an idealistic
19 year-old, my initial answer didn’t involve money, so they poked me again
about how I was going to make a living. I told them that I planned on making
money by being a professor. I would get paid to teach, do research, and present
at conferences. That was my official response anyway.

Secretly, I chose the major I did because I wanted to make a living playing with
ideas. But I didn’t want my play with ideas to be corrupted by concerns about
what was the most practical idea, what would get the most grant money, or what
would be the best way to fuel the profit margins of a new or existing company.
My intentions were pure. I wanted to explore the depths of the most abstract and
confounding questions---and attempt to find answers for them. I wanted to be
able to do that freely, and without regard to any other goal save finding the
truth. How naive of me.

<!--me-->

As it turns out, in the real world, truth is a secondary goal at best. Yes, the
Silicon Valley set *loves* ideas. They love the idea of people who *love* ideas.
But all that is secondary to a love of whatever will turn into cash from the
consumer. If you’re just interested in pulling back the curtain on life’s big
questions, it better be accompanied by some bits about your burn rate and
scalability, or you are in for a rough ride. This wouldn’t be a problem if
Silicon Valley’s model weren’t the prevailing paradigm for businesses today.
Unfortunately for idea people, it is.

Enter the age of the entrepreneur. My kids, and my friends’ kids are going to be
raised in an environment where entrepreneurs are the new movie gods and rock
stars. They will be bombarded by *Shark Tank* competitions at their schools, and
websites with calls for more young people to start their own companies. I have
no problem with the aspect of this that focuses on nurturing creativity and
innovation. What I *do* have a problem with is that the message is delivered
with an undeniable and explicit connection to turning a profit.

My reason for being circumspect about this profit motive is that I fear that an
idea explored for profit is an idea only partially pursued. What I mean here is
that kids need to be able to play with ideas. By “play” I mean *free play*,
where the following things are true ([courtesy of Dr. Peter
Gray](https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/freedom-learn/200811/the-value-play-i-the-definition-play-gives-insights)):

> 1. It is self-chosen and self-directed

> 2. It is activity in which means are more valued than ends

> 3. Play has structure, or rules, which are not dictated by physical necessity
> but emanate from the minds of the players

> 3. Play is imaginative, non-literal, mentally removed in some way from “real” or
> “serious” life; and

> 4. Play involves an active, alert, but non-stressed frame of mind.

The key here is that free play is about play in a zone removed from clear and
decided goals— especially those placed on us by the business world (profit and
growth).

So yes, let’s get students excited about creativity and innovation---let’s
*train* them to do those things. **However**, let’s not make the mistake of
thinking that the way to do that is to lure them in with entrepreneurship —
which is centered around the constraint of profit-seeking. Learning about
entrepreneurship has its place, but its place is *not* as the basis for learning
about creativity and original thought. When the goal is profit, the ideas will
all start to resemble one another —which doesn’t sound either innovative or
creative. When the goals are relaxed, and the mind is allowed to roam free for a
while, we’ll be amazed by what the young minds bring back to us.

Who knows, those ideas may even make some serious money. Wouldn’t that be neat?
And it would be *precisely* because that was not the original goal. Funny how
that can work out, isn’t it?
